A tour of the C# language
Article
03/18/2022
13 minutes to read
15 contributors


C# (pronounced "See Sharp") is a modern, object-oriented, and type-safe programming language. C# enables developers to build many types of secure and robust applications that run in .NET. C# has its roots in the C family of languages and will be immediately familiar to C, C++, Java, and JavaScript programmers. This tour provides an overview of the major components of the language in C# 8 and earlier. If you want to explore the language through interactive examples, try the introduction to C# tutorials.

C# is an object-oriented, component-oriented programming language. C# provides language constructs to directly support these concepts, making C# a natural language in which to create and use software components. Since its origin, C# has added features to support new workloads and emerging software design practices. At its core, C# is an object-oriented language. You define types and their behavior.

Several C# features help create robust and durable applications. Garbage collection automatically reclaims memory occupied by unreachable unused objects. Nullable types guard against variables that don't refer to allocated objects. Exception handling provides a structured and extensible approach to error detection and recovery. Lambda expressions support functional programming techniques. Language Integrated Query (LINQ) syntax creates a common pattern for working with data from any source. Language support for asynchronous operations provides syntax for building distributed systems. C# has a unified type system. All C# types, including primitive types such as int and double, inherit from a single root object type. All types share a set of common operations. Values of any type can be stored, transported, and operated upon in a consistent manner. Furthermore, C# supports both user-defined reference types and value types. C# allows dynamic allocation of objects and in-line storage of lightweight structures. C# supports generic methods and types, which provide increased type safety and performance. C# provides iterators, which enable implementers of collection classes to define custom behaviors for client code.

C# emphasizes versioning to ensure programs and libraries can evolve over time in a compatible manner. Aspects of C#'s design that were directly influenced by versioning considerations include the separate virtual and override modifiers, the rules for method overload resolution, and support for explicit interface member declarations.

.NET architecture
C# programs run on .NET, a virtual execution system called the common language runtime (CLR) and a set of class libraries. The CLR is the implementation by Microsoft of the common language infrastructure (CLI), an international standard. The CLI is the basis for creating execution and development environments in which languages and libraries work together seamlessly.

Source code written in C# is compiled into an intermediate language (IL) that conforms to the CLI specification. The IL code and resources, such as bitmaps and strings, are stored in an assembly, typically with an extension of .dll. An assembly contains a manifest that provides information about the assembly's types, version, and culture.

When the C# program is executed, the assembly is loaded into the CLR. The CLR performs Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation to convert the IL code to native machine instructions. The CLR provides other services related to automatic garbage collection, exception handling, and resource management. Code that's executed by the CLR is sometimes referred to as "managed code." "Unmanaged code," is compiled into native machine language that targets a specific platform.

Language interoperability is a key feature of .NET. IL code produced by the C# compiler conforms to the Common Type Specification (CTS). IL code generated from C# can interact with code that was generated from the .NET versions of F#, Visual Basic, C++. There are more than 20 other CTS-compliant languages. A single assembly may contain multiple modules written in different .NET languages. The types can reference each other as if they were written in the same language.

In addition to the run time services, .NET also includes extensive libraries. These libraries support many different workloads. They're organized into namespaces that provide a wide variety of useful functionality. The libraries include everything from file input and output to string manipulation to XML parsing, to web application frameworks to Windows Forms controls. The typical C# application uses the .NET class library extensively to handle common "plumbing" chores.

For more information about .NET, see Overview of .NET.

Hello world
The "Hello, World" program is traditionally used to introduce a programming language. Here it is in C#:

C#

Copy

Run
using System;

class Hello
{
    static void Main()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("Hello, World");
    }
}
The "Hello, World" program starts with a using directive that references the System namespace. Namespaces provide a hierarchical means of organizing C# programs and libraries. Namespaces contain types and other namespaces—for example, the System namespace contains a number of types, such as the Console class referenced in the program, and a number of other namespaces, such as IO and Collections. A using directive that references a given namespace enables unqualified use of the types that are members of that namespace. Because of the using directive, the program can use Console.WriteLine as shorthand for System.Console.WriteLine.

The Hello class declared by the "Hello, World" program has a single member, the method named Main. The Main method is declared with the static modifier. While instance methods can reference a particular enclosing object instance using the keyword this, static methods operate without reference to a particular object. By convention, a static method named Main serves as the entry point of a C# program.

The output of the program is produced by the WriteLine method of the Console class in the System namespace. This class is provided by the standard class libraries, which, by default, are automatically referenced by the compiler.

Types and variables
A type defines the structure and behavior of any data in C#. The declaration of a type may include its members, base type, interfaces it implements, and operations permitted for that type. A variable is a label that refers to an instance of a specific type.

There are two kinds of types in C#: value types and reference types. Variables of value types directly contain their data. Variables of reference types store references to their data, the latter being known as objects. With reference types, it's possible for two variables to reference the same object and possible for operations on one variable to affect the object referenced by the other variable. With value types, the variables each have their own copy of the data, and it isn't possible for operations on one to affect the other (except for ref and out parameter variables).

An identifier is a variable name. An identifier is a sequence of unicode characters without any whitespace. An identifier may be a C# reserved word, if it's prefixed by @. Using a reserved word as an identifier can be useful when interacting with other languages.

C#'s value types are further divided into simple types, enum types, struct types, nullable value types, and tuple value types. C#'s reference types are further divided into class types, interface types, array types, and delegate types.

The following outline provides an overview of C#'s type system.

Value types
Simple types
Signed integral: sbyte, short, int, long
Unsigned integral: byte, ushort, uint, ulong
Unicode characters: char, which represents a UTF-16 code unit
IEEE binary floating-point: float, double
High-precision decimal floating-point: decimal
Boolean: bool, which represents Boolean values—values that are either true or false
Enum types
User-defined types of the form enum E {...}. An enum type is a distinct type with named constants. Every enum type has an underlying type, which must be one of the eight integral types. The set of values of an enum type is the same as the set of values of the underlying type.
Struct types
User-defined types of the form struct S {...}
Nullable value types
Extensions of all other value types with a null value
Tuple value types
User-defined types of the form (T1, T2, ...)